docs: Expanded sections on applying custom CSS and SCSS to the default theme, and working with dark mode (#2377)
vuejs/vitepress: docs/guide/extending-default-theme.md

# Extending the Default Theme

> VitePress' default theme is optimized for documentation, and a number of elements can be customized via `.vitepress/config.[extension]`. Consult the [Default Theme Config Overview](../reference/default-theme-config) for a comprehensive list of options.

Reviewer: site config has a separate section, no need to keep putting same thing everywhere.

Author: As mentioned in another comment, I initially found it confusing to work out which config file I was supposed to modify. Just trying to help new users get up to speed quickly.

If you're opposed to the repetition, perhaps it could just be a hyperlink instead, like this:

```suggestion
VitePress' default theme is optimized for documentation, and a number of elements can be customized via [the site config file](../reference/site-config). Consult the [Default Theme Config Overview](../reference/default-theme-config) for a comprehensive list of options.
```

## Customizing CSS

> To apply custom CSS, you first need to create a custom VitePress theme. Place the following code into `.vitepress/theme/index.js` which imports the default theme and adds an additional CSS file to the bundle:

Reviewer: it can be index.ts too, maybe worth a mention

Author: Done. 👍

::: code-group

> ```js [.vitepress/theme/index.js]

Reviewer: code groups are not meant to just show title, keep the original formatting

Author: Well, I find it cleaner and clearer to have the filename outside the actual code block. It also means that when you click the "copy" button, you don't have the additional comment included. I think using a code-group tab for this purpose is a clean solution, but if you're against that I can revert to the original.

import './custom.scss'      // [!code hl]

export default DefaultTheme
```
:::

Here's an example SCSS file that could be used to change the brand colors, automatically creating variations from a single base color:

::: code-group
```scss [.vitepress/theme/custom.scss]
/**
 * Customize default theme styling by overriding CSS variables:
 * https://github.com/vuejs/vitepress/blob/main/src/client/theme-default/styles/vars.css
 */

 $brand-color: #27afd5;

 :root {
   /* Brand color 1: for colored text and links */
   --vp-c-brand-1: #{$brand-color};
   /* Brand color 2: for button hover state, etc. */
   --vp-c-brand-2: #{lighten($brand-color, 10%)};
   /* Brand color 3: for button backgrounds, etc. */
   --vp-c-brand-3: #{$brand-color};
   /* Brand color soft: for tip boxes etc. 
      Must have transparency to account for nested boxes. */
   --vp-c-brand-soft: #{transparentize($brand-color, 0.86)};
 }
```

::: tip
When SASS variables or functions are used to define a CSS variable, they need to be wrapped in `#{ ... }`. See the SASS documentation [here](https://sass-lang.com/documentation/breaking-changes/css-vars) and [here](https://sass-lang.com/documentation/variables).

> :::

Reviewer: remove this, we don't need to teach sass/scss to users. if someone is using a pre processor they should be aware of it's syntax

Author: Yes, I agree that it's not necessary to explain basic SCSS syntax for the most part, *however* in this case I believe it's warranted since:

* It's difficult to find within the SASS documention. It's hidden under a "breaking changes" document, and not mentioned at all on the main [SASS Variables](https://sass-lang.com/documentation/variables/) doc page where you would expect.
* Combining CSS variables and SASS variables may not be standard practice for many devs (generally you would stick to one or the other), but when customizing VitePress in this way it becomes necessary

Having this tip here would have saved me 20mins of hunting through my CSS inspector for why it wasn't working, and then paging through multiple Google results until I found the issue.

export default DefaultTheme
```

The default theme CSS is customizable by overriding root level CSS variables. This example shows how to change the main brand color from VitePress green to a shade of purple:

```css
/* .vitepress/theme/custom.css */
:root {
  /* The main brand color:
     Typically used for Hero text, links, "brand" buttons, 
     search result boxes, and other highlights */
  --vp-c-brand: #646cff;

> 

Author: Thanks. I've added it back in. If you have a suggestion for a better description of where `brand-light` is used in the default theme, I can add that in also. I don't think I saw an obvious use of it the last time I looked.

  /* Lighter variation of brand color:
     Typicaly used for the border of brand-colored buttons */
  --vp-c-brand-lighter: #9da2fd;

  /* Darker variation of brand color:
     Typically used for brand button hover state */
  --vp-c-brand-dark: #373ec3;
  
  /* Even darker variation of brand color
     Typically used for brand button active state */
  --vp-c-brand-darker: #3030c0;
}
```

See [`vars.css`](https://github.com/vuejs/vitepress/blob/main/src/client/theme-default/styles/vars.css) in the default theme for other variables that can be overridden.

You can also apply any other CSS style rules here. While using CSS variables is good practice to help reduce repetition, plain CSS is also fine.

Just remember to choose colors that work well in both dark and light modes, unless you disable the dark mode toggle or specify unique colors for both light and dark modes. See [Dark Mode](#dark-mode) below for more.

## Using CSS Pre-Processors

If you'd like to use SASS, LESS, or Stylus within your theme, first make sure the relevant pre-processor is installed by running the applicable command:

> 

Author: What's the benefit of the `@latest` suffix? It's not something I've really used before. Doesn't `npm install` typically fetch the latest stable version by default? Or does `@latest` grab alpha/beta versions?

> 

Author: Just circling back to your comment from last year. Is there any benefit in specifying `@latest` when running `npm install`? 

According to the [npm documentation](https://docs.npmjs.com/cli/v10/commands/npm-dist-tag#description):

> By default, `npm install <pkg>` (without any `@<version>` or `@<tag>` specifier) installs the latest tag.

Is this not necessarily the case with other package managers?

Or is `@latest` a way of overriding whatever version might already be present in your `package.json`?

I couldn't see any places where `@latest` is used in the current VitePress docs, but if that is the preferred syntax we can go with that for consistency. But it would just be good to understand the intention behind that.
